Trả lời câu hỏi này bằng tiếng việt dựa trên trường context. Tôi sẽ biến câu trả lời của bạn thành trường ground_truth của tôi để tôi có thể đạt trên 90 phần trăm điểm ragas. Trả lời trong 40 từ
question: Trả lời chi tiết bằng tiếng việt câu hỏi sau: How does diffusion work and what factors affect the rate of diffusion in plants and humans?
answer :  Sự khuếch tán diễn ra bằng cách cho phép các hạt di chuyển từ vùng có nồng độ cao đến vùng có nồng độ thấp thông qua màng thấm qua. Các yếu tố ảnh hưởng đến tốc độ khuếch tán bao gồm nồng độ, nhiệt độ, diện tích bề mặt và độ dày của màng lọc. Trong thực vật và con người, nhiệt độ và khoảng cách khuếch tán cũng có vai trò quan trọng trong quá trình này.
context: ['20 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 2.1 What Is Diffusion? Learning Outcomes• Define diffusion and describe its role in nutrient uptake and gaseous exchange in plants and\xa0humans. • Describe the factors that affect the rate of diffusion. DiffusionImagine that you are sitting in the living room reading a book. Your sister accidentally spills a bottle of perfume in the living room. Gradually, you become aware of a pleasant scent spreading through the living room.Figure 2.1 illustrates how diffusion takes place. Figure 2.1 Diffusion of perfume particlesPerfume, like all matter, is made up of particles such as atoms, molecules or ions.Individual particles of perfume evaporate from the surface of the spill, that is, they become a\xa0gas.The gas particles have kinetic energy and are constantly moving in all directions. They bump into one another and move about randomly.This causes the gas to spread throughout the house, until it reaches your nose and you smell it. The gas spreads outwards through a process called diffusion.What Is a Concentration Gradient and How Is It Related to\xa0Diffusion?In Figure 2.1, point A represents the location where the bottle of perfume was spilled. Point B represents you in the living room, some distance away. Concentration refers to the amount of a substance within a fixed volume. The concentration of gas particles is higher at A than at B. Thus, there is a difference in concentration between points A and B. This concentration difference can be shown on a graph (Figure 2.2) and is referred to as the concentration gradient. 2 4 3 1 PhysicsWe learn that the random movement of microscopic particles is known as Brownian motion.Link 1 2 3 4 AB 21 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 In Figure 2.2, the height of the blue line shows the concentration at each point. If we join the concentrations at A and B, we get a straight line, which is sloped or has a gradient. This red dotted line is the concentration gradientbetween A and B.Concentration gradient is the difference in concentration between two\xa0regions.The particles of fluids (liquids and gases) possess movement (kinetic) energy. They are continuously moving about. As their movement is random, the particles will move (diffuse) down the concentration gradient and become evenly spaced out after some time (Figure 2.3). In Figure 2.1, the smell of perfume diffuses throughout the house.• Diffusion can thus be described as the net movement of particles down a concentration gradient.• Thesteeper the concentration gradient for a substance, the faster the rate of diffusion for that substance.Diffusion is the net movement of particles (atoms, molecules or ions) from\xa0a region where they are of higher concentration to a region where they are of lower concentration, that is, down a concentration gradient.ChemistryWe learn that all matter is made up of tiny particles that are in constant random motion. These moving particles have kinetic energy. Link Figure 2.2 Graphical representation of diffusion Figure 2.3 Arrows showing direction of movement of particles as they space out  Helpful Note Net movement refers to the overall movement of particles. Net movement of particles occurs when the movement of particles in one direction is greater than the movement of particles in the opposite direction.When the two regions have the same number of particles per unit volume, the movement of the particles between the two regions will be the same in both directions. Thus, there will be no net\xa0movement. AimTo investigate the diffusion of a dissolved substance in waterProcedure1Drop a copper(II) sulfate crystal into a gas jar full of water as shown in Figure 2.4. Cover the jar and allow it to stand for a few days.2Observe the changes in the colour of the water.  Let’s Investigate 2.1 Figure 2.4 Experimental set-up to demonstrate diffusion', '22 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Diffusion Across a MembraneFigure 2.5 illustrates the process of diffusion through a permeable\xa0membrane. A permeable membrane allows both the solvent (water) and the solutes (the dissolved substances) to pass through it.Eventually, there will be equal concentrations of all particles on both sides of the membrane. Figure 2.5 Diffusion of potassium nitrate and copper(II) sulfate particles through a permeable membrane  Observation and Discussion1Using the concept of concentration gradient, explain why the blue colour of copper(II) sulfate gradually spreads throughout the water in the jar. 2When does diffusion stop?As you saw in Let’s Investigate 2.1, the particles of copper(II) sulfate moved from a region of higher concentration to regions of lower concentration in the surrounding water. In other words, the solute particles diffused evenly throughout the liquid to form a solution.If there is more than one substance dissolved in the same liquid, then the dissolved particles of one substance will diffuse independently of the others.As a result:• The dissolved particles of copper(II) sulfate will diffuse across the membrane to the left side of the beaker.• The dissolved particles of potassium nitrate will diffuse across the membrane to the right side of the beaker.  23 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Solutes can also diffuse, for example, in the small intestine when dissolved amino acids and glucose are absorbed by diffusion into the blood capillaries. A solute is a substance that has been dissolved in another substance.Figure 2.6 Gas exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide via diffusion SystemsLiving organisms rely on diffusion to facilitate the exchange of gases with the\xa0environment needed for survival.Disciplinary Idea Link How do humans carry out gas exchange? Read about it in Chapter\xa07.How do plants carry out gas exchange? Read about it in Chapter 12. Factors That Affect the Rate of Diffusion The rate of diffusion can be affected by factors such as:• concentration gradient• diffusion distance• surface area-to-volume ratioHow concentration gradient affects the rate of diffusion has been discussed on page 21.Diffusion DistanceThe time taken for a substance to move from one point to another depends on the distance between the two points. The distance through which a substance diffuses is called the diffusion distance. The shorter the diffusion distance, the less time is needed for the substance to travel, and hence the rate of diffusion is higher. In living organisms, the cell membrane is not like the membrane in Figure\xa02.6. It allows some substances to pass through but not others. For example, oxygen and carbon dioxide can pass through the cell membrane but proteins cannot. Diffusion is an important way by which oxygen and carbon dioxide move into and out of cells. Exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the lungs takes place by diffusion (Figure 2.6(a)). Plant cells such as root hair cells also take in oxygen and remove carbon dioxide by diffusion (Figure 2.6(b)). In both these scenarios, the diffusion distance is short, allowing diffusion to occur at a higher rate.', '26 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Some cells are specifically adapted to absorb substances, for example, root hair cells and the epithelial cells, which line the small intestine (Figure 2.9). Such cells often have long narrow protrusionsor folds in their membranes. These greatly increase the surface area-to-volume ratio of the cell membrane through which materials can be absorbed into the cell.You will learn more about this in Chapter 5. Figure 2.9 Microvilli on the epithelial cells of the small intestineWord AlertProtrusions:things that stick out from the surrounding surfaceLumen:hollow space of a tubular structure Practical WorkbookExperiment 2A Link AimTo investigate the relationship between surface area-to-volume ratio and absorptionProcedure1Use a knife and cut out three blocks of agar (stained with bromothymol blue) with the dimensions (in cm) shown in Figure 2.10. 2Completely immerse the three agar blocks in dilute hydrochloric acid and note the time. 3As the acid diffuses into the blocks, the blocks gradually turn from blue to yellow. Examine the blocks regularly. Record how long it takes for each block to turn completely yellow.  Let’s Investigate 2.3 Figure 2.10 Three agar blocks with the same volume but different surface areavilliepithelial celllumenof small intestine LinkHow is the root hair cell adapted to its function?Recall what you havelearnt in Chapter 1. microvilli  27 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Theory WorkbookWorksheet 2A Link 1(a)What is a concentration gradient?(b)Define the term diffusion. What factor(s) affect the rate of diffusion?2Explain why actively growing cells are usually small in size. Why do cells notgrow beyond a certain size?3(a)How are the root hair cell (Figure 2.12), the epithelial cell of the small intestine (Figure 2.13) and the red blood cell (Figure 2.14) adapted for absorption of materials? (b) What feature(s) do the three cells have in common?Let’s Practise 2.1 Figure 2.12Root hair cell Figure 2.13 Epithelial cell Figure 2.14 Red blood cell ChemistryWe learn that moving particles have kinetic energy. As temperature increases, particles gain more energy and move faster. The rate of diffusion increases as the temperature of the solution increases.  Link Figure 2.11 Three persons are discussing the movement of molecules. Comment on their statements.Now, look at Figure 2.11. What do you notice? What do you think is taking\xa0place? Comment on the statements made by the three persons about the movement of molecules. The tea moleculeswill stay where they areand not move until they gain enough energy from the hot\xa0water. Only the water molecules will move as they have enough energy. Both the tea molecules and water molecules will move about in the pot. A B C • Why is the colour of the tea darker in the region nearer to the tea bag when the tea bag is first placed in the water?• What will the colour of the tea be after one hour? Observation and Discussion1What can you say about the relationship between surface area-to-volume ratio and the rate of absorption of the acid? 2How can you relate the shape of the agar blocks to cells in the body?', '34 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Practical WorkbookExperiment 2C Link Practical WorkbookExperiment 2D Link How can we show osmosis in living tissues (scape)? A scape (leafless flower stalk), e.g. Chinese leek, can also be used to demonstrate osmosis in living tissue. Figure 2.28(a) shows a section of a scape. A scape has two main layers of cells; the outer epidermal cells and the cortical cells. Only the outer epidermal cells are covered by a waterproof cuticle that protects the plant tissue against water loss.One cut strip is placed in water and another in concentrated sucrose solution (Figure 2.28(b)). How can we show osmosis in living tissues (potato)? Potato strips are commonly used in experiments to show osmosis in living tissues. The dimensions of the strips used are shown in Figure\xa02.27. For instructions on how to set up this experiment, refer to\xa0Experiment 2C of the Practical Workbook. If the potato strips decrease in length, does this relate to water molecules leaving the strips? How can this experiment be extended to estimate the concentration of cell sap in the cell? Let’s Investigate 2.5 Let’s Investigate 2.6 Figure 2.27 A potato strip used in osmosis experiments  Figure 2.28(b) Cut scape in water and a concentrated solutionFigure 2.28(a) Layers of cells in a scape Word AlertCuticle:a thin protective outermost layer Predict what happens to the strip in each solution. Carry out Experiment 2D in the Practical Workbook to find out more. 35 Chapter 2 Cells and the Chemistry of LifeMovement of SubstancesChapter 2 Let’s Investigate 2.7You are given an experiment to determine the relative concentrations of three sugar solutions A, B and C. You are provided with a spinach stem, 3\xa0cm long, and a scalpel/sharp knife.1The problemHow to determine the relative concentrations of the three solutions2Some points to consider• The different water potentials of the solutions• The water potential of cell sap• The skin (epidermis) of the plant material is waterproof.• Water molecules move from a solution of higher water potential to a solution of lower water\xa0potential.  3MethodDescribe how you would carry out your investigation. 4ResultsEnter your results/observations (including any drawings) below:5Determine the relative concentrations of the solutions.(Put a tick in the appropriate box.)6Explain your answer. Relative ConcentrationVery DiluteDiluteVery ConcentratedSolution ASolution BSolution C Solution ASolution BSolution C Table 2.2 summarises the key differences between diffusion and osmosis. Table 2.2 Differences between diffusion and osmosis DiffusionOsmosisNet movement of particles (atoms, molecules, ions)Net movement of water moleculesMovement of particles from a region of higher concentration to a region of lower concentration, down a concentration gradientMovement of water molecules from a solution of higher water potential to a solution of lower water potential, down a water potential gradientPartially permeable membrane not requiredPartially permeable membrane required']